---
layout: page
title: CSE-666 Programming Assignment 02
description: Advanced fingerprint region segmentation from hand selfie images using image processing and machine learning.
img: assets/img/finger.gif
importance: 1
category: UB
---

## Course Details

- **Course Number:** CSE 666
- **Assignment:** Programming Assignment 2
- **Professor:** Nalini Ratha

## Team Information

- **Student:** Ronak Haresh Chhatbar
- **UBName:** ronakhar
- **Teammates:** Ronak Haresh Chhatbar

## Project Goal

The objective of this project is to segment and detect fingerprint regions from a series of hand selfie images using advanced image processing and machine learning techniques.

## Project Description

This project involves several stages of development, from initial data collection to final testing of the detection algorithm:

1. **Data Collection:** Curated a personal dataset of hand images with different orientations and distances.
2. **Annotation:** Used LabelMe and YoloMark to annotate hand images, highlighting visible fingerprint regions.
3. **Detection:** Trained a YOLOv4-tiny object detection model using Darknet to identify fingerprint regions within images.
4. **Validation:** Validated the algorithm against annotated images to assess performance, achieving a mean Average Precision (mAP) of 76.71%.
5. **Testing:** Tested the algorithm on an unseen dataset, demonstrating its effectiveness with a 100% mAP.
6. **Reporting:** Drafted a detailed report discussing the algorithm's design, methodology, and performance outcomes.

<div class="container mt-8">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
            {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/finger.gif" title="Visualization of the Fingertip Detection Process" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-4" %}
        </div>
    </div>
</div>

## Model Development and Results

- The YOLOv4-tiny model balances speed and accuracy effectively.
- Trained on a diverse and augmented dataset for robust detection.
- Achieved high precision, recall, and mAP scores, indicating reliable fingertip detection.

## Future Scope

Potential improvements include:

- Expanding the dataset for enhanced robustness.
- Utilizing a more complex network like full YOLOv4 for better accuracy.
- Optimizing the model for specific hardware for real-time applications.

## References

References to open-source tools and libraries used in this project:

- [Darknet GitHub Repository](https://github.com/AlexeyAB/darknet)
- [YoloMark GitHub Repository](https://github.com/AlexeyAB/Yolo_mark)
- [LabelMe Annotation Tool](https://github.com/wkentaro/labelme)


## Conclusion

The Fingertip Detection Project demonstrates a successful approach to detecting fingerprint regions in hand selfie images, offering a foundation for future biometric identification systems.
