---
layout: page
title: CSE-666 Programming Assignment 01
description: Detailed exploration of facial detection and analysis in a comprehensive programming assignment.
img: assets/img/gender.png
importance: 1
category: UB
---

## Course Details

- **Course Number:** CSE 666
- **Assignment:** Programming Assignment-01
- **Professor:** Nalini Ratha

## Team Information

- **Student:** Ronak Haresh Chhatbar
- **UBName:** ronakhar
- **Teammates:** Ronak Haresh Chhatbar

<div class="container mt-8">
    <div class="row">
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
            {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/page_11_img_1.png" title="Assignment 1 Dashboard" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-4" %}
        </div>
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-4">
    <div class="col-lg-12">
        <h2 class="mt-4">Tasks and Techniques in CSE666 Assignment</h2>
        <p>Overview of the tasks and the computational techniques applied in the programming assignment.</p>

        <h3>Task 1: Annotation</h3>
        <p>Utilized LabelMe to annotate 129 images with bounding boxes for facial detection.</p>

        <h3>Task 2: Face Detection</h3>
        <p>Employed the MTCNN model from the face-image-analysis repository to detect faces in the 'congress.jpg' image, successfully identifying 133 faces.</p>

        <h3>Task 3: Sentiment/Expression Analysis</h3>
        <p>Applied the face-emotion-recognition library with mobile_net7 model to analyze and classify facial expressions into categories such as anger, disgust, happiness, etc.</p>

        <h3>Task 4: Gender Classification</h3>
        <p>Implemented gender classification using the simple_CNN.81-0.96.hdf5 TensorFlow model, achieving notable precision and recall metrics.</p>

        <h3>Task 5: Face Pose Estimation</h3>
        <p>Conducted face pose estimation using the Rotation Representation for Unconstrained Head Pose Estimation library to determine the orientation of faces.</p>

        <h3>Task 6: Feature Extraction</h3>
        <p>Extracted facial features using the ARC-face model, producing embeddings for facial recognition.</p>

        <h3>Task 7: Face Recognition</h3>
        <p>Matched faces against a dataset of lawmakers using embeddings, labeling recognized individuals or marking as "Unknown".</p>

        <h3>Technology and Tools</h3>
        <ul>
            <li>LabelMe for Annotation</li>
            <li>MTCNN for Face Detection</li>
            <li>Face Emotion Recognition Library</li>
            <li>TensorFlow for Gender Classification</li>
            <li>Head Pose Estimation Library</li>
            <li>ARC-face Model for Feature Extraction</li>
        </ul>
    </div>
</div>
